Let's go to Kamoo who is maybe less concerned with murder,
more concerned with suicide <laugh> yeah. As a way to explore human nature.
So he is, uh, probably my favorite existentialist,
probably one of the more accessible existentialists.
And like you said, one of the people who did,
didn't like to call himself an existentialist.
So what are your thoughts about Kamo?
What role does he play in this story of existentialism? So.
I find Kamo totally fascinating. I, I really do.
And for years I didn't teach KMU because the famous
thing that you're referring to, the myths Sisyphus,
which is a sort of it published as a book, super accessible,
really fascinating. He's a great writer,
really engaging the opening line is something like there is,
but one truly significant philosophical question. Yes.
And that is the question of suicide. Yeah.
And I thought I can't teach my four 18 year olds of, you know, like how <laugh>.
Yeah. I, I, I just thought that's terrible. Like how can I, I mean,
it's not wrong, like, that's a, but do I wanna bring that into the classroom?
And, and so I read it, I read the, the essay. I,
I avoided it for a long time because just because of that line,
and I thought I'm not gonna be able to make sense of this in a way that will be
helpful for anyone, but finally, one year, maybe seven or eight years ago, I,
I sat down to read it. I thought I've, I've gotta really confront it.
And I read it and it's incredibly engaging. I mean, it's really,
really beautiful. And, and Kim was against suicide,
which just turns out to be good. <laugh>, you know, like I was happy about that,
but he,
he has a bit of a bleak understanding of what human existence
amounts to. And so, uh,
in the end he thinks that human existence is absurd and it
it's being absurd is a kind of technical term for him.
Mm-hmm <affirmative> and it means that the episodes in your life
and your life as a whole presents itself to you as if it's got a
meaning mm-hmm <affirmative>, but really it doesn't <laugh>.
So there's this tension between the way things seem to be
on their surface and what really turns out to be true
about them. And, and he gives these great examples. Like,
you probably remember these, he says, um, there you are, you're walking, uh,
along the,
the street and you there's a plate glass window in a building and through the
window, uh, you, you see somebody talking on a telephone. I mean, we,
I imagine it as, but camu <laugh> didn't <laugh>, uh,
but you see somebody talking on a cell phone and, and he's animated,
he's talking a lot as if things really meant something mm-hmm <affirmative>.
And yet KEMU says it's a dumb show <laugh>
and it's not dumb in the sense, just in the sense that it's stupid,
it's dumb in the sense that it's silent.
It presents itself as if it's got some significance and yet its significance is
withheld from you. And he says, that's what our lives are. Like,
everything in our lives presents them to us as if it's got a significance,
but it doesn't, it's absurd. Uh, and, and then he says,
really what our lives are like, are like,
they're like the lives of OUS just day after day,
you do the same thing. You know, you wake up at a certain time,
you get on the bus, you go to work, you take your lunch, AQ, get off my,
I have a colleague who once said to me, something like this,
it was about October or so in the fall semester. I said, how's,
how's it going Dick? He said, well, you know how it is.
I got on the conveyor belt at the beginning of the semester and I'm just going
through and that's, that's the way my life is. And Kam things that,
that experience,
which you can sometimes have reveals something true about what
human lives are like, mm-hmm, <affirmative>,
our lives really just are like the life of SIS who rolls this Boulder up the
hill from morning, till night.
And then at night he gets to the top and it rolls back down to the bottom,
over the,
the course of the night he walks back down and then he starts it all over again.
Mm-hmm <affirmative> and he says, OUS is condemned to this life.
Like we are condemned to our lives,
but we do have one bit of freedom.
And it's the only thing that we can hang onto.
It's the freedom to stick it to the odds who put us in this
position, <laugh> by embracing this existence. Yeah.
Rather than giving up and committing suicide. And I, I thought, well,
it's kind of a happy ending <laugh> <laugh>, but, but,
but I also thought it, it, it's a dim view of what our,
our existence amounts to. So I,
I think there's something fascinating about that,
but what I came to believe, and I tried to write about this once.
I know you read the thing about aliveness mm-hmm <affirmative> that I published
once that's secretly a criticism of Kamoo.
I don't think I mentioned Kamoo in there,
but I think Kamoo has got the phenomenon wrong,
or he's missed some in important aspect of it. Cuz in Kamoo view,
when you experience your day as sort of going on in this deadening way,
and you're just doing the things that you always do the way you always do them
for Kamoo that reveals the truth about what our lives are.
But I think there's some aspect, at least for me, and maybe,
maybe he just didn't feel this or didn't have access to it.
Maybe others don't. But for me there's an extra part to it,
which is somehow that yes, that's the way things are
and it's inadequate <laugh> and there's something that's
missing from that aspect of our existence.
That could be there mm-hmm <affirmative> and it feels like our lives are not
about just putting up with that and sticking it to the gods by embracing it,
but seeking that absence part of it,
the part that's recognizable in its absence,
in your experience of that. And that's, that's what I think. I,
I think we do have the experience of the presence of that in moments when
you feel truly alive. And that's what you mean by the word aliveness,
which is a fascinating and a powerful word. Yeah. That's what I mean by it.
I mean,
I think most people can recognize moments in their lives when
they really felt alive. And it could happen in a moment when, you know,
I don't know,
maybe miles Davis felt it in that moment when he was responding to Herby
Hancock's cord,
or maybe you feel it in that moment where you grabbed for the hand,
the first date,
then the gesture is reciprocated mm-hmm <affirmative> or maybe you feel it in
some moment when you are doing a kind of peak athletic
thing or, or watching somebody else do a peak athletic thing. Um,
but I think there are moments when we, when it feels like it's not like the way
camu is describing things and it's better because of that.